---
date: 2024/02/18
layout: article
title: February 2024
description: Notes for the month of February, 2024
tag: micro-frontend, learn
author: You
---

## Beginning

I stepped into February with the ambition to complete a few courses, one of which being [Micro-Frontends](https://www.udemy.com/certificate/UC-2b3267d6-75f0-4d3f-ada0-1aae9fa77e97/), and the other Next js, but specifically the new App router.

I truly had no idea the term `microfrontend` was even a thing.
I'd heard of `microservices` but microfrontend sounded intriguing so I thought i'd try explore a bit and see if its something that would interest me.
in all of the projects that i've worked on, i haven't really felt the need to implement a microfrontend architecture but i understand why its super important and i also understand how it could
save time and effort.

for those unfamiliar with microfrontend, here's a small section to help you get upto speed _(beginner-friendly)_

### Microfrontend

_throughout this example, `microfrontend` will be abbreviated as MFE or mfe_

to understand the need for mfes, let me give you an example. you're currently building an ecommerce website that has these 2 components, a product list component and a cart component.
let's say we take up the **"CLASSIC"** approach and build both of these pages in one application, we then have a Single Page Application (SPA) right?

don't think too much on which framework/platform you'd built it with, for now assume its plain html.

now, within these pages, we may have 100s of components, sections, input-fields etc.. which would make it very tedious to maintain and implement in **1** codebase, and this is known as a
**MONOLITHIC** application.

if we had to convert this "CLASSIC" application into a mfe application, how would we do it? we'd make the product-list a mfe, and the cart a mfe. now, we have **2** SEPARATE codebases
which makes everything a bit more easy to manage and implement.
But, you may think, when i tap on the "Add to Cart" button in the product-list mfe, how will that trigger a change in the cart component if they are separate?

This is where we use APIs. there will be NO direct communication between 2 mfes. so in this scenario how would this pan out? in the product-list mfe, upon tapping the "Add to Cart" button
we'd have to call an api that manages that users cart and tell it to add this too.

and in the cart mfe, we'd have to call an api to fetch the items in the users cart and also an api to manage this cart incase the user wants to increase the qty, remove the item etc..

_but, again, why use MFE?_

- one gigantic benefit we get is that these applications are now 2 separate apps.
  now, two different teams can work on these applns side-by-side in isolation since they have no dependency amongst each other. these teams, now working independently can choose whatever development
  style they want. you want to use React for the product-list? GO FOR IT. Does the other team want to use Vue for the cart? SURE!
- this way, if one team makes a breaking change, the other team is not affected.
- and this also makes the project easy to manage and understand

now that we have 2mfes, how do we show them on the browser? using a THIRD mfe known as a **CONTAINER**

a container decides when and where to show the mfes we've created.

_thats it for a small intro into microfrontends_

### Intriguing concepts

some aspects of this learning journey i found really intriguing are

- built time integration
- run time integration
- server side integration
- webpack

_to know more on what these 3 are, [click here](https://2024.briha.xyz/articles/microfrontends#understanding-build-time-integration) to read my article_

here are the topics i made notes and learnt about in this course:

- microfrontends, and their need in a modern web application
- understanding integrations
- webpack
  - webpack dev server
  - implementing moduleFederationPlugin
  - understanding moduleFed config options
  - sharing dependencies among remote apps
- implementing a CI/CD pipeline with Github actions
- how to develop with a production style workflow
- issues with styling when it comes to microfrontend apps
- working with Navigation in a microfrontend apps
  - react router
  - history router
  - browser router
  - memory router
  - hash router (only definition and differences)
  - separation of routing options in dev and prod (browser in dev and memory in prod for remote apps)
- communication between microfrontend apps
- authentication in microfrontend apps
  - simple flow (no backend involved)

### next js (app router)

I have worked with extensively with the next js pages router and got very comfortable with how it works and when the new app router, although i heard and read many interesting and new things, i was very reluctant to learn more on it.
the more i scrolled on twitter(x) the more i read that, the new server and client component structure of the app router is not only efficient but also helps pages load faster, optimises seo and performance, so i thought id give it a try, _how hard and different could it be?_

andd, ill also be talking about zod and react-hook-forms because for some reason, i am seriously overwhelmed when it comes to using these 2 together.

#### takeaways

the way you extract the `[id]` and `[slug]` for dynamic pages is just waay easier, and YES! BYE BYE getStaticProps and getStaticPaths! ive spent weeks trying to understand those concepts and the fact that it soo much easier to implement all of this in the App router, makes me want to pivot my preference to this app router at once.

here are some of my notes, (just so that i can come back here for reference)

- to create a page, we need to create a folder with that pages name, and then inside that folder, we need to have a `page.tsx`. only this page.tsx is publicly accessible.
- within these folders we can have custom stylesheet modules and if we try to access it through the browser, we cant, because no access-io
- there are `special` pages in this app router, one of which is this `page.tsx`, then we have `not-found.tsx` which is basically a 404 page that will be shown if the page whose folder its in isnt available
- we also have `layout.tsx` to set the layout of that page.tsx file. and we also have `loading.tsx` which will be rendered in case the page is being loaded.
- note that, all these files can be local scoped, in the sense that we can have ALL these files for a single page OR we could have it for the entire application, the choice is yours
- how do we access query params and ids?

```tsx [page.tsx]
interface PageProps {
  // id is one dynamic property
  params: { id: number; slug: string[] };
  searchParams: { sortOrder: string };
}

const Page = ({
  params: { id, slug },
  searchParams: { sortOrder },
}: PageProps) => {
  // the above code may be a bit complex at first glance, but we're extracting id,
  // slug from params and sortOrder from searchParams
};
```

- if you want to return some jsx/tsx you should use a page.tsx, otherwise if youre returning some http code, then you should use a route.tsx file
- now, if you dont give a request param in your function definition, next js will by default cache your response and will return the same data the next time you call this api, to make sure youre fetching every single time, you need to mention `request: NextRequest`, even though you may not use the request
- how to get the response for a single item? as in if i have a route like this `/api/items/1` how do i return the data for the 1st item? we follow this structure and keep a `[id]` folder with a route.tsx file inside it and we can follow the same interface for props as above
- note: whats the difference between PUT and PATCH? we use PUT when we're replacing an object and PATCH when we're updating a few properties of that object

```
app
└── api
    └── users
        ├── [id]
        │   └── route.tsx
        └── route.tsx
```

```tsx [api/users/id/route.tsx]
interface Props {
  params: { id: number };
}

export function GET(request: NextRequest, { params: { id } }: Props) {
  if (id > 10) {
    return NextResponse.json({ error: "item not found" }, { status: 404 });
  }

  return NextResponse.json({ id });
}

export async function POST(request: NextRequest) {
  const body = await request.json();
  // Validate the input
  return NextResponse.json(body);
}

export async function PUT(request: NextRequest, { params: { id } }: Props) {
  // Validate the input
  const body = await request.json();
  // if invalid, return 400 status
  if (invalid)
    return NextResponse.json({ error: "invalid input" }, { status: 400 });

  // fetch the item from the db
  // if the item doesnt exist, return 404 error
  if (!item)
    return NextResponse.json({ error: "item not found" }, { status: 404 });

  // update the item
  // return the updated item
  return NextResponse.json({ id: 1, name: body.name });
}

export async function DELETE(request: NextRequest, { params: { id } }: Props) {
  // Validate the input
  const body = await request.json();
  // if invalid, return 400 status
  if (invalid)
    return NextResponse.json({ error: "invalid input" }, { status: 400 });

  // fetch the item from the db
  // if the item doesnt exist, return 404 error
  if (!item)
    return NextResponse.json({ error: "item not found" }, { status: 404 });

  // update the item
  // return the deleted item
  return NextResponse.json({});
}
```

- coming to ZOD, its very similar to Joi in the sense that its used to validate the input and throw errors if there're any issues

```ts [schema.ts]
import { z } from "zod";

const schema = z.object({
  name: z.string().min(10),
  email: z.string().email(),
  age: z.number().gte(18),
});

export default schema;
```

- here's how wed integrate it with the route.tsx file

```tsx [api/users/id/route.tsx]
import schema from "./schema";

interface Props {
  params: { id: number };
}

export async function PUT(request: NextRequest, { params: { id } }: Props) {
  // Validate the input
  const body = await request.json();
  // if invalid, return 400 status
  const validation = schema.safeParse(body);

  if (!validation.success)
    return NextResponse.json(
      { error: validation.error.errors },
      { status: 404 }
    );

  // fetch the item from the db
  // if the item doesnt exist, return 404 error
  if (!item)
    return NextResponse.json({ error: "item not found" }, { status: 404 });

  // update the item
  // return the updated item
  return NextResponse.json({ id: 1, name: body.name });
}
```
